"Given the circumstances of our lives now, in this type of lifetime, so busy, so many
constraints, most people are not able to spend 7, 9, 12 years studying at the feet of their
teachers and practicing all the teachings. If one is unable to receive any of the teachings
and practice them well, but if one does kangrimens over him well, and if one has done a lot of
ahti-yoga practice, should one feel content that one can accomplish one's practice in
his lifetime?"
For example, generally Dzogchen is the highest teaching, converse teaching, embodiment of
teaching, and we practice this really can reach enlightenment and make a difference. Dzogchen
teaching alone, we don't need it for that reason. For example, as I said, Garabdol is
three-word. First word is tatyektok yihin tepeh. This translation is kind of not always easy,
that bring that flavor to Dzogchen. At least I cannot do always that, but decisive, one
point is decisive in one way or the other. What that means? It means that natural level
is, I mean that's the nature, but also the natural level, we don't have to in the teaching
say, we don't have to be more water in the mouth. What's called mouthwatering. We don't
have to mouthwater into the other instruction, this and that thing. It's destructive. If you
really have the courage and the commandment to develop, this Dzogchen is the highest teaching,
there's nothing higher and deeper, more profound, more well-teaching than this. Dzogchen, and
that is the witness by all these great masters. For example, lumchimba, rich enlightenment,
rich enlightenment by Dzogchen meditation, and gimme lumbar-rich enlightenment, Dzogchen
in Dzogchen practices. Garabdol-rich enlightenment by Dzogchen practice. Of course, why they
become as a lineage master? Because they practice one's mutual making, courage and the commandment
not lingering in this and that. Really they pointed out, they rich enlightenment. One point
Garabdol-rich is kind of slightly different, but medhishiri, medhishiri said, once upon
the tawariha, the level, they are ordinary person like many of them. They asked, just
said, but their courage and commandment, detriment, mention and stable and confidence practice,
put that into action. Then they become such great masters, great biological beings.
When you read this, there are so many of these, of course. Anu, you are teaching this and that.
Of course, it's good to practice those. Dzogchen is the most powerful ultimate, and therefore
what the great master Kepong Nachong, that I think many of you read this book, Life Story
of Medhishiri, he looked and he said in his teaching, said that ultimately there is nothing
higher and bigger Buddha than the Buddha Samyant Bhattara. That Buddha taught Dzogchen teaching.
Dzogchen teaching. And there is nothing higher and deeper than Dzogchen teaching. There is
nothing to say. Even Buddha came right now in here, to us. He has nothing more to say
than Dzogchen teaching. That's what this great master says. It's true. That's really
what it is. All these great masters, many of these, they really reach enlightenment, because
of Dzogchen realization, combined with the Ma'an and Azi. Therefore, this is the highest
teaching, and it's really excellent. That's what teaching says.